admin/download_data.md, before:

# Google drive - big file
https://www.quora.com/How-do-I-download-a-very-large-file-from-Google-Drive

# ActiveMotif

- They will give us a long link like this: ftp://ftp.activemotif.com<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=ftp-3A__ftp.activemotif.com_&d=DwMF-g&c=WO-RGvefibhHBZq3fL85hQ&r=CiePDOg3jDpiyuOnMdRMAf55kb0y979UKdT9-l_8xx4&m=sG-xxxx_AhGbB1PxIiUTGzFWLjIwpK-ff9Oza6JZM&s=Nmf-t3MTzOiZQ0WcCpKsFd6PMprEvuMK-izroBVUwB0&e=>

- We just need to get in to "ftp://ftp.activemotif.com" (some browsers might not open this)

- log in with the user, password.

- click on the folders and get the links.

- get on the terminal, transfer node. 
```
wget --user=user --password=password {link_for_necessary_folders}
# 'wget -m' for a folder.
```

# Biopolymers

- Biopolymers (BPF) make their data available through an SFTP site

- Their data will often come as both fastq files AND fastq.bz2 files.
- Feel free to delete one of these, we really don't need both and they take up a lot of space.

- Typically, the researcher will have an email from BPF with their login, password and the dataset id (usually in the form of FC_$number)
- Complete instructions can be found [here](https://genome.med.harvard.edu/documents/illumina/BPFNGS_FTP_Instructions.pdf)
- You can use `scp` or `rsync` to pull down the files

A typical command might look like this:

`scp -r jmubel2@bpfngs.med.harvard.edu:./FC_03443 . `


# Dana Farber MBCF

## Notes
- Zach and co. always share raw data but may default to sharing it through their pydio web interface, which is not reliable.

- If you email Zach (zherbert@mail.dfci.harvard.edu) and tell him who's data you need (cc: the researcher) he will setup an FTP site for you to use. (Drew has left, so don't email him anymore.)

- Make sure to let them know you've pulled down the data, so they can turn off the site when you're done (it costs money to run this).

- Their data is typically in tar.gz files, it can pay off to decompress them right away so you know if you have the whole file...

## Getting the data

- You can access the data through a `wget` command.
- Preface it with `nohup` so your job keeps running even if you connection drops.
- The final nohup.out file will the download progress in it if you want to confirm download.
A typical command might be something like this:

`nohup wget -m ftp://jhutchinson:MBCFjhutchinson\!@34.198.31.178/*`

-m mirror is to copy a mirror image of the directory/data including all files and subfolders

Use this if nohup isn't working. Double check the UN, PW and IP address as they change.:
`wget -m ftp://jhutchinson:MBCFjhutchinson\!@34.198.31.178`

*note the escaped exclamation point in the password, they like to put characters like that in their passwords, which are usually in the form of MBCF$userid!*

# Broad Institute

- It can depend on the platform the researcher used, but the Broad typically only give out BAM files for normal RNA-seq runs.
- For their DGE (96 well) platform, they give everything under the sun.
- You have to use their ASPERA system to pull down the files and you will need not only login and password info to get the data, but a limited time password to decrypt the data.
  - you can run ASPERA on your machine but by far the easiest method [*can someone update this when they do an actual Broad download? I'm not sure this is toally accurate*] is with their command line script `shares_download.sh`.
  - If you don't have this info, have the client request it from the Broad and have the client send you the Broad's reply email with the info.

# Basespace by Rory
wget https://da1s119xsxmu0.cloudfront.net/sites/knowledgebase/API/08052014/Script/BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.zip
unzip BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.zip
rm run_BaseSpaceRunDownloader.bat  BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.zip
python BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.py -r <Run ID> -a <access token>

if project is specified instead of run:
wget https://gist.githubusercontent.com/rlesca01/7ce2ca0c35c7ff97a215/raw/0eeaa8cc1b3eff00babf398a82a31f4b0946f5bb/BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2a.py

# Basespace by Victor

Use Illumina's native GUI client or run [BaseMount](https://basemount.basespace.illumina.com) on Ubuntu.

The [Python downloader](https://support.basespace.illumina.com/knowledgebase/articles/403618-python-run-downloader) is deprecated and no longer supported by Illumina.

## Update:

If you need to download processed data (i.e: not the bcl files but the fastq or a whole project) or you don't have a run number you can use the [BaseSpace Sequence Hub CLI](https://developer.basespace.illumina.com/docs/content/documentation/cli/cli-overview#Entitiesandsub-entities). After installing it you can download specific datasets or projects with ```bs download```.

Example: Downloading specific fastq files from a project:

1st. Identify datasets with ```bs list datasets```
```
$bs list datasets > avail_datasets
$head avail_datasets

+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
|            Name             |                 Id                  |     Project.Name     |   DataSetType.Id    |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 13_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.9a309d19c84f44c191fc86919b9a562e | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 11_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.c29329f59b2d42beaa0e617e50829e06 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 10_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.d3946986f8da4d8ba9a8c5db4037ff7c | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 12_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.262b749568fb4733ad958f9dfb4df0e3 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 14_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.2645866a5f514e0fb0bb26b191eff138 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 23_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.e84152ac7b754e4ca4f0e859b5864344 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 5_Randa_01_25_19            | ds.3170cc50b2774650bdbcfedb5ce48830 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
```
(I clean the header and remove lines of ---- to make avail_datasets to dataset_list)

2nd. Clean up a bit the file and select the ones you're instered in. (in this case I'm using `gawk` to select the ones processed by "illumina.fastq.v1.8" analysis.
```gawk 'BEGIN{FS="|"}{print $2,$4,$5}' dataset_list | gawk 'BEGIN{OFS=","}$3=="illumina.fastq.v1.8"{print $1,$2}' > fastqIDs.txt```

Then I use the following code to download each dataset and store it in a Project folder:

`<obtain_ds.sh>`

```
#!/bin/sh

fastqID_file="$1"

while read -r line; do
    dsID="$(cut -d',' -f1 <<<"$line")"
    projectID="$(cut -d',' -f2 <<<"$line")"
	# line is available for processing
	bs download dataset -n ${dsID} -o ${projectID}/${dsID}
done < ${fastqID_file}
```

`<obtain_ds_job.sh>`
```
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --job-name=mittendorf          # Job name
#SBATCH --partition=short             # Partition name
#SBATCH --time=0-11:59                 # Runtime in D-HH:MM format
#SBATCH --nodes=1                      # Number of nodes (keep at 1)
#SBATCH --ntasks=1                     # Number of tasks per node (keep at 1)
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1             # CPU cores requested per task (change for threaded jobs)
#SBATCH --mem=4G                     # Memory needed per node (total)
#SBATCH --error=jobid_%j.err           # File to which STDERR will be written, including job ID
#SBATCH --output=jobid_%j.out          # File to which STDOUT will be written, including job ID
#SBATCH --mail-type=ALL                # Type of email notification (BEGIN, END, FAIL, ALL)


bash obtain_ds.sh fastqIDs.txt
```


# Basespace by Sergey
basespace-cli. New Illumina sequencers upload data to basespace cloud. bs utility copies data from cloud to HPC. To copy bcl files: bs cp //./Runs/<project_name>/Data .

Commit message:

Add Google Drive instructions
Add use of rclone to download data from Google Drive.

admin/download_data.md, after:

# Google drive - big file

Use rclone to copy or sync files to a Google Drive directory. Instructions are at https://rclone.org/drive/. A few notes:

- log in to the transfer node on HMS (`transfer.rc.hms.harvard.edu`)
- create new remote using `rclone config` and select `n`. Give it a name.
- choose `12` for Google Drive
- skip `client_id` and `client_secret`
- for `scope`, select either 1 if you want to modify on Google drive or 2 if you just want to read files and copy them
- no need to select a root unless you want access to the "Computers" folder
- skip `service_account_file`
- `n` for auto config since we are a remote machine
- copy the link into your browser. Log in to Google. Copy key and paste into terminal
- if the drive is in your "Shared" folder on Google Drive, configure as a Shared Drive.

Additional notes:

- type `rclone lsd remote:` to see the files on your Google drive directory
- if you want to see what in your "Shared with me" drive, use --drive-shared-with-me as in `rclone --drive-shared-with-me lsd remote:`
- note that "Shared" and "Shared with me" are two different drives.

https://www.quora.com/How-do-I-download-a-very-large-file-from-Google-Drive

# ActiveMotif

- They will give us a long link like this: ftp://ftp.activemotif.com<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=ftp-3A__ftp.activemotif.com_&d=DwMF-g&c=WO-RGvefibhHBZq3fL85hQ&r=CiePDOg3jDpiyuOnMdRMAf55kb0y979UKdT9-l_8xx4&m=sG-xxxx_AhGbB1PxIiUTGzFWLjIwpK-ff9Oza6JZM&s=Nmf-t3MTzOiZQ0WcCpKsFd6PMprEvuMK-izroBVUwB0&e=>

- We just need to get in to "ftp://ftp.activemotif.com" (some browsers might not open this)

- log in with the user, password.

- click on the folders and get the links.

- get on the terminal, transfer node. 
```
wget --user=user --password=password {link_for_necessary_folders}
# 'wget -m' for a folder.
```

# Biopolymers

- Biopolymers (BPF) make their data available through an SFTP site

- Their data will often come as both fastq files AND fastq.bz2 files.
- Feel free to delete one of these, we really don't need both and they take up a lot of space.

- Typically, the researcher will have an email from BPF with their login, password and the dataset id (usually in the form of FC_$number)
- Complete instructions can be found [here](https://genome.med.harvard.edu/documents/illumina/BPFNGS_FTP_Instructions.pdf)
- You can use `scp` or `rsync` to pull down the files

A typical command might look like this:

`scp -r jmubel2@bpfngs.med.harvard.edu:./FC_03443 . `


# Dana Farber MBCF

## Notes
- Zach and co. always share raw data but may default to sharing it through their pydio web interface, which is not reliable.

- If you email Zach (zherbert@mail.dfci.harvard.edu) and tell him who's data you need (cc: the researcher) he will setup an FTP site for you to use. (Drew has left, so don't email him anymore.)

- Make sure to let them know you've pulled down the data, so they can turn off the site when you're done (it costs money to run this).

- Their data is typically in tar.gz files, it can pay off to decompress them right away so you know if you have the whole file...

## Getting the data

- You can access the data through a `wget` command.
- Preface it with `nohup` so your job keeps running even if you connection drops.
- The final nohup.out file will the download progress in it if you want to confirm download.
A typical command might be something like this:

`nohup wget -m ftp://jhutchinson:MBCFjhutchinson\!@34.198.31.178/*`

-m mirror is to copy a mirror image of the directory/data including all files and subfolders

Use this if nohup isn't working. Double check the UN, PW and IP address as they change.:
`wget -m ftp://jhutchinson:MBCFjhutchinson\!@34.198.31.178`

*note the escaped exclamation point in the password, they like to put characters like that in their passwords, which are usually in the form of MBCF$userid!*

# Broad Institute

- It can depend on the platform the researcher used, but the Broad typically only give out BAM files for normal RNA-seq runs.
- For their DGE (96 well) platform, they give everything under the sun.
- You have to use their ASPERA system to pull down the files and you will need not only login and password info to get the data, but a limited time password to decrypt the data.
  - you can run ASPERA on your machine but by far the easiest method [*can someone update this when they do an actual Broad download? I'm not sure this is toally accurate*] is with their command line script `shares_download.sh`.
  - If you don't have this info, have the client request it from the Broad and have the client send you the Broad's reply email with the info.

# Basespace by Rory
wget https://da1s119xsxmu0.cloudfront.net/sites/knowledgebase/API/08052014/Script/BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.zip
unzip BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.zip
rm run_BaseSpaceRunDownloader.bat  BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.zip
python BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2.py -r <Run ID> -a <access token>

if project is specified instead of run:
wget https://gist.githubusercontent.com/rlesca01/7ce2ca0c35c7ff97a215/raw/0eeaa8cc1b3eff00babf398a82a31f4b0946f5bb/BaseSpaceRunDownloader_v2a.py

# Basespace by Victor

Use Illumina's native GUI client or run [BaseMount](https://basemount.basespace.illumina.com) on Ubuntu.

The [Python downloader](https://support.basespace.illumina.com/knowledgebase/articles/403618-python-run-downloader) is deprecated and no longer supported by Illumina.

## Update:

If you need to download processed data (i.e: not the bcl files but the fastq or a whole project) or you don't have a run number you can use the [BaseSpace Sequence Hub CLI](https://developer.basespace.illumina.com/docs/content/documentation/cli/cli-overview#Entitiesandsub-entities). After installing it you can download specific datasets or projects with ```bs download```.

Example: Downloading specific fastq files from a project:

1st. Identify datasets with ```bs list datasets```
```
$bs list datasets > avail_datasets
$head avail_datasets

+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
|            Name             |                 Id                  |     Project.Name     |   DataSetType.Id    |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 13_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.9a309d19c84f44c191fc86919b9a562e | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 11_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.c29329f59b2d42beaa0e617e50829e06 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 10_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.d3946986f8da4d8ba9a8c5db4037ff7c | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 12_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.262b749568fb4733ad958f9dfb4df0e3 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 14_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.2645866a5f514e0fb0bb26b191eff138 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 23_Randa_01_25_19           | ds.e84152ac7b754e4ca4f0e859b5864344 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
| 5_Randa_01_25_19            | ds.3170cc50b2774650bdbcfedb5ce48830 | Randa_01_25_19_Run1  | common.files        |
```
(I clean the header and remove lines of ---- to make avail_datasets to dataset_list)

2nd. Clean up a bit the file and select the ones you're instered in. (in this case I'm using `gawk` to select the ones processed by "illumina.fastq.v1.8" analysis.
```gawk 'BEGIN{FS="|"}{print $2,$4,$5}' dataset_list | gawk 'BEGIN{OFS=","}$3=="illumina.fastq.v1.8"{print $1,$2}' > fastqIDs.txt```

Then I use the following code to download each dataset and store it in a Project folder:

`<obtain_ds.sh>`

```
#!/bin/sh

fastqID_file="$1"

while read -r line; do
    dsID="$(cut -d',' -f1 <<<"$line")"
    projectID="$(cut -d',' -f2 <<<"$line")"
	# line is available for processing
	bs download dataset -n ${dsID} -o ${projectID}/${dsID}
done < ${fastqID_file}
```

`<obtain_ds_job.sh>`
```
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --job-name=mittendorf          # Job name
#SBATCH --partition=short             # Partition name
#SBATCH --time=0-11:59                 # Runtime in D-HH:MM format
#SBATCH --nodes=1                      # Number of nodes (keep at 1)
#SBATCH --ntasks=1                     # Number of tasks per node (keep at 1)
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1             # CPU cores requested per task (change for threaded jobs)
#SBATCH --mem=4G                     # Memory needed per node (total)
#SBATCH --error=jobid_%j.err           # File to which STDERR will be written, including job ID
#SBATCH --output=jobid_%j.out          # File to which STDOUT will be written, including job ID
#SBATCH --mail-type=ALL                # Type of email notification (BEGIN, END, FAIL, ALL)


bash obtain_ds.sh fastqIDs.txt
```


# Basespace by Sergey
basespace-cli. New Illumina sequencers upload data to basespace cloud. bs utility copies data from cloud to HPC. To copy bcl files: bs cp //./Runs/<project_name>/Data .
